---
layout: single 
title: "Brood 13" 
category: story
permalink: /weblog/topics/humor/brood_13_cicadas_2007.html
tags: [humor] 
comments: false 
author: John Hawks 
---


<p>
That's what they're calling the <a href="http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/18780937/">imminent invasion</a> of 17-year cicadas that we're supposed to get here next month. 
</p>

<blockquote>The red-eyed, shrimp-sized, flying insects don't bite or sting. But they are known for mating calls that produce a din that can overpower ringing telephones, lawn mowers and power tools.</blockquote>

<blockquote>Brood XIII is expected across northern Illinois, and in parts of Iowa, Wisconsin, Michigan and Indiana. Cicadas live only about 30 days as adults, and their main goal is mating.</blockquote>

<p>
My girls are horrified by cicada skins, so I can only imagine their reaction to this: 
</p>

<blockquote>The insects are eaten in other parts of the world, with descriptions of the taste ranging from shrimp to canned asparagus to not much at all.</blockquote>

<p>
Now, there's a fair difference between the taste of shrimp and canned asparagus. Maybe they taste different because of some kind of weird tree sap <i>terroire</i>. 
</p>

<p>
They're supposed to emerge "between Tuesday and June 1." Whoopie!
</p>

<p>
Apparently, if you're getting married this month, you don't want an ice sculpture: 
</p>

<blockquote>"We put our tray down and immediately the cicadas came off the ground and attacked the ice. Literally, it was a moving sculpture, this big black ugly mass of cicadas constantly moving," said Nadeau.</blockquote>

<blockquote>"I don't want to talk myself out of work, but that was just too gross," he said.</blockquote>

<p>
Did I mention, whoopie!
</p>

