---
layout: single 
title: "Apes like barbecue" 
category: story
permalink: /weblog/reviews/chimpanzees/diet/apes-like-barbecue-2008.html
tags: [chimpanzees, diet] 
comments: false 
author: John Hawks 
---

<p class="noindent" >A paper in the current <span  class="cmti-10">Journal of Human Evolution </span>by Victoria Wobber, Brian Hare and Richard Wrangham (<a  href="#XWobber:2008">Wobber et&#x00A0;al.</a>,&#x00A0;<a  href="#XWobber:2008">2008</a>) reports on a series of experiments trying to get great apes to eat cooked food. With meat, sweet potatoes and carrots, it seems they like the cooked version better&#8212;although with apples and regular potatoes they are indifferent. They also tried to figure out if the apes liked the cooked food because of its taste, texture, or what.      </p>

<div class="quote">      <p class="noindent" >Overall, great apes in these experiments preferred cooked foods      to  raw,  from  tubers  to  meat.  However,  they  did  not  prefer  all      foods cooked, being indifferent as to the choice between raw and      cooked apple and between raw and cooked white potato. Neophobia      could not be eliminated as a contributing factor in some results      but,  in  experiment  4,  chimpanzees  that  were  equally  unfamiliar      with cooked and raw beef still preferred the cooked item. Subjects      preferences  remained  stable  across  test  sessions  and  across  test      populations, suggesting that food choices were not strongly shaped      by past experience. The different properties being used to select      the cooked items were also strongly salient across individuals and      populations. This implies something inherently preferable about the      effects of cooking which is immediately discernable.      </p>

<p class="noindent" >These results support the hypothesis that great apes perceive and      prefer  properties  of  cooked  food  relative  to  raw,  in  the  case  of      both starchy foods and meat. It was unclear which properties apes      were sensitive to in the cooked food. The results of experiment      2 suggested that subjects may have used texture to discriminate      between the carrots of different manipulated consistencies. Yet apes      lack of preference for items such as cooked apple, which is softer      than raw apple, showed that other factors were involved as well. It      is important to note that in both cases where the cooked item was      not preferred over the raw (white potato and apple), individuals      did not prefer the raw item, but were simply indifferent between      the two options. This implies that apes may have chosen the cooked      item only when that item seemed signicantly better, with the white      potato and apple not showing large enough differ- ences between      cooked and raw to create a preference distinction. Future work can      investigate which properties of food items altered by cooking are      the most salient in determining preferences (<a  href="#XWobber:2008">Wobber et&#x00A0;al.</a>,&#x00A0;<a  href="#XWobber:2008">2008</a>,                                                                                                                                           347)</p>

</div> <p class="indent" >   They put their paper into the context of the evolution of food preference and cooking in hominids. Cooking clearly has some benefits for hominids: it transforms some indigestible foods into useful ones, facilitates energy release from some foods with less digestive requirements, and it reduces the wear and tear on teeth. The question: When did the hominid taste system adapt to match the dietary benefits of cooking? Did hominids start out with a taste for cooked food, which they could satisfy when they invented fire? Or did hominids invent fire for other reasons (e.g., light, protection) and only later adapt their sensory systems to tolerate cooked food? </p>

<p class="indent" >   The study answers this question by showing that the taste preference for <span  class="cmti-10">some</span> cooked foods may have already been present in ancestral hominids. The fact that all of the great ape species showed a preference for some cooked foods is pretty convincing. It seems that the study included enough trials to show that this wasn&#8217;t simply the apes preferring to try something different from their usual diet, although this might bear more checking. One would also want to exclude the possibility that the apes had been <span  class="cmti-10">smelling </span>cooked foods for many years (as a result of human contact&#8212;these being captive apes). </p>

<p class="indent" >   The results raise the question of why exactly apes should exhibit a preference for a style of food they have never eaten, and would never obtain in their natural habitats. We may hypothesize that the same kinds of molecular signals that are present in certain cooked foods are also useful for differentiating between other good and bad foods. This is the explanation favored by Wobber et al.:      </p>

<div class="quote">      <p class="noindent" >Overall,  our  ndings  conform  to  evidence  that  wild  chimpanzees      choose seeds that have been heated by wild res (Brewer, 1978),      demonstrating that great apes possess a preference for cooked items.      These preferences may be widespread in mammals, as shown by the      evidence for rats and cats preferring cooked items (Ramirez, 1992;      Bradshaw et al., 2000), and as would be expected from the improved      quality of cooked items. Most likely, therefore, early hominids prior      to their control of re possessed these preferences as well. This, in      turn, suggests that cooking would have spread quickly after it arose,      with preferences for the properties of cooked food being exapted      from ancestral traits rather than having developed as an adaptation      to eating cooked food (<a  href="#XWobber:2008">Wobber et&#x00A0;al.</a>,&#x00A0;<a  href="#XWobber:2008">2008</a>, 347).</p>

</div> <p class="indent" >   I find it interesting that the chimpanzees in the study exhibit such a strong preference for cooked meat. Meat gets a lot of attention in both chimpanzee and human groups, and was apparently handled more intensively by early <span  class="cmti-10">Homo </span>than earlier hominids. I wonder if this might have spurred experimentation to a greater                                                                                                                                      extent than more quotidian plant foods.                                                                                                                                      </p>

<p class="indent" >                                                                                                                                      </p>

    <h2 class="likechapterHead"><a   id="x1-2000"></a>References</h2> <a   id="likesection.2"></a><a   id="Q1-1-3"></a>   <div class="thebibliography">   <p class="bibitem" ><span class="biblabel"> <a   id="XWobber:2008"></a><span class="bibsp">&#x00A0;&#x00A0;&#x00A0;</span></span>Wobber V, Hare B, Wrangham R. 2008. Great apes prefer cooked food. J   Hum Evol 55:340&#8211;348. <a  href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhevol.2008.03.003" >doi:10.1016/j.jhevol.2008.03.003</a>. </p>

   </div>      </body></html>     

