---
layout: single 
title: "Evolutionary analysis of celiac risk loci" 
category: research
permalink: /research/sams-celiac-2011
comments: false 
author: John Hawks 
---

Background Outline

Celiac disease  (CD) is a common, highly heritable (Nistico et al., 2006) small intestinal inflammatory condition induced by wheat gluten and related proteins from rye and barley (Sollid, 2000).  Specific risk alleles of the HLA-DQA1 and HLA-DQB1 genes, but not solely responsible for development of CD (Wolters et al., 2007).  The well-understood role of the HLA-DQ (DQ2 & DQ8) heterodimers encoded by these risk alleles is to present cereal peptides to CD4+ T cells, activating an inflammatory immune response in the intestine.  Several genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified additional risk loci, many of which also lie in regions of the genome associated with immune function.  Unlike the case with HLA, for many of these additional risk loci, the causal variants are unknown (cite GWAS studies).

    CD is a common food intolerance in the Western world that affects around 1%-2% of the population.  It also has high occurrence in North Africa, India, and the Middle East and reaches its highest recorded frequency among the Saharawi of North Africa (5.6%) (Zhernakova et al. 2010).  Clinical presentation of the disease can vary from mild gastrointestinal forms to severe forms, which often present with other autoimmune diseases and low fertility.  When left untreated, the clinical presentation of the most severe form of celiac disease in juveniles is failure to thrive, malnutrition, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and distension.  These symptoms are referred to as the tip of the celiac disease iceberg, as the disease can additionally lead to severe vitamin deficiencies, anemia, and osteoporosis (Barker and Liu, 2008).

    Natural selection targets alleles that have some impact on individual fitness.  CD may have had negative effects on fitness in past human populations, particularly since the treatment (gluten-free diet) has only been clinically recognized since the discovery of gluten as the trigger in the 1950s (Barker and Liu, 2008).  The common occurrence of CD (>1%) in several populations could either be the result of genetic drift and purifying selection or it could be the result of positive selection on causal loci.

   To date, three studies have approached the question of natural selection in CD.  Soranzo and colleagues (2009) present evidence that the 12q24 region, which carries risk alleles for type-1 diabetes, coronary artery disease, and celiac disease has been under recent natural selection. Linkage disequilibrium, Fst, iHS, and XP-EHH scores provide evidence that this haplotype arose from a selective sweep in European and nearby populations ~3,400 years ago, possibly as a result of an adaptive immune response to living in high-density (agricultural) populations.  Additionally, Barreiro and colleagues (2009) in a Nature Reviews Genetics paper briefly analyzed a set of SNPs from the GWAS catalogue (citation NHGRI) that are associated with immune related phenotypes and found that four of nine loci associated with CD showed signals of recent positive selection as measured by the integrated haplotype score (iHS).  Similarly, Zhernakova and colleagues (2010) completed an analysis of ten causal loci, also using the iHS method.  This study found consistent signs of selection in three loci (IL12A, IL18RAP, and SH2B3).  The authors conclude that the SH2B3 rs3184505*A risk allele likely plays a role in protection against bacterial infection via activation of the NOD2 recognition pathway.  These results suggest the possibility that risk for common autoimmune conditions such as CD may be the result of past positive selection on immune related loci in the genome to fight infection.  Under this evolutionary scenario, disease phenotypes may be a trade-off from this selection.
   As a genetic variant is under positive selection it increases in frequency faster than it would by drift alone.  This increase in frequency leaves a characteristic signature of increased linkage at a common genetic site, relative to neutral sites of the same frequency.  Existing linkage-based tests such as Linkage Disequilibrium Decay (LDD), Extended Haplotype Homozygosity (EHH), and Integrated Haplotype Score (iHS) are able to detect evidence of selection at single loci under strong positive selection.  However, many (if not most) traits of interest in selection studies are likely polygenic (Pritchard et al., 2010).  Selection on a trait that is affected by many genetic loci can be difficult to detect with linkage-based methods because selection on many loci simultaneously allows the trait to change over time more rapidly without great shifts in allele frequencies.  Under this scenario, it becomes more difficult to differentiate the effects of weak positive selection from the expectations of genetic drift. 
   In the case of the immune system, it is evident that disease phenotypes are not only polygenic, but rather, many of the variants underlying them are shared with other traits.  Therefore, positive selection at one locus may negatively affect other traits.  In the case of CD, the negative effects are not necessarily on other immune related diseases, but on the digestive system.  However, these negative effects occur only in the presence of dietary gluten, which is a relatively recent innovation in human populations.  Nonetheless, we may expect that in individuals in the past with the most severe cases of CD did not survive.  This trade-off between any potentially positive effects of CD risk variants and diet may also have weakened positive selection on the genetic network underlying CD risk.
   Previous studies have demonstrated that at least a few genetic variants associated with CD show significant signals of positive selection.  What remains to be addressed is if this pattern of positive selection can be generalized to the network of variants currently associated with the disease.  

Methods
a. Data Sources
I used variants from the catalogue of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) (downloaded on 06/15/2011) associated with celiac disease risk.  Of the fifty-six variants listed in GWAS, thirty-six have the risk allele listed.  Of these thirty-six, thirty-three were selected to include in the final analysis with three being removed either because they lie within the HLA region or because their frequency in Europe is too low to include in the analysis.  The variants included are listed in Table X.
   Genotype data used in this analysis are from the 1000 genomes project and HapMap projects.  Because the majority of CD risk variants were ascertained in European Populations, this study will focus exclusively on the question of selection in Europe.

b. Estimation of Linkage Disequilibrium Decay
An allele under positive selection increases in frequency more rapidly than neutral alleles, leaving less time for recombination to reduce the amount of linkage disequilibrium (LD) around the selected site.  Therefore, a signal of selection is an increased amount of LD compared to other genomic sites with similar frequency. All genotype data for the 200kb around each CD risk site from the 1000 genomes phase I (May 2011 release) was extracted from SPSmart (citation).  Comparative samples from chromosomes 19 and 22 were extracted from the HapMap combined phase II and III genotype datasets.  
   Instead of using software to phase genotype data into haplotypes I use a measure of LD similar to the LDD method utilized by Wang and colleagues (2006), which uses genotype data to assess the extent of linkage around a site.
For each risk or target SNP, the set of genotype data around the site is divided into two pools, each pool consists of all individuals in the sample homozygous for the ancestral version of the target SNP, the other pool homozygous for the derived version of the target SNP.  Ancestral/derived status was determined by either Chimpanzee (PanTro2), Orangutan (PonAbe1), or Rhesus Macaque (RheMac2) orthologs downloaded from the dbSNP132 Primate Ortholog track on the UCSC Table Browser.
   For each pool of genotype data, linkage decay was measured outwards from the target SNP by counting the fraction of homozygous genotypes (FHG) in each successive SNP.  For each successive SNP, the maximum FHG is the FHG of the previous SNP such that linkage must always either stay the same or reduce, but never increase with each SNP moving outwards from the target SNP.  Thus, the FHG statistic is similar to the EHH statistic for phased haplotypes.
   The FHG linkage data from both pools (ancestral/derived) is then combined into a single statistic as follows:
	Diff = |DFHG - AFHG|
Where DFHG is the FHG value from the derived pool and AFHG is the FHG value from the ancestral pool.  Thus, Diff is larger when the FHG of one pool is greater than the other pool.  
   To test the significance of the FHGDiff values at several distances from each risk site, samples of genotype data around loci with similar minimum allele frequency (MAF) (within 1.0%) of each risk allele from chromosomes 19 and 22 were chosen for a resampling test. 
   Two types of resampling tests were performed.  First, each risk site was tested alone for significant linkage at six distances (10, 15, 20, 25, 50, and 100 kilobases from risk SNP) by randomly selecting 10,000 sites from the pool of sites from chromosomes 19 and 22 with similar MAF and comparing each sample statistic to the risk statistic.  The resulting P-value is an empirical P-Value because it represents the fraction of samples that had a greater linkage statistic than the risk site.
   Similarly, a resampling test was performed on the entire sample of risk sites by randomly choosing 10,000 sets of comparative samples with similar allele frequencies, calculating the mean linkage statistic of each sample, and comparing to the risk set mean.  Again, the resulting P-values were calculated for the same 6 intervals listed above.
   A similar process was used to calculate the significance of subsets of the risk locus set in which the risk variants are either ancestral or derived.
c. Fst Test
In addition to the resampling test described above, I also performed an Fst based test to assess the role of selection on standing variants in the celiac risk sample (citation for why this works (in Pickrell 2009 article)).  To calculate weighted Fst between continental regions I selected data from six hapmap populations (CEU, TSI, CHB, JPT, LWK, and YRI) for pairwise Fst calculations.  
   Again, I performed resampling tests on individual and combined risk sites to determine if the Fst of the celiac risk sites is significantly elevated compared to genome-wide sites with similar MAF in Europe.



